So far in this lesson,
you'll learn about different facets surrounding
the building up of an experiment or study.
In the second half of this lesson,
you'll start learning about potential problems that can weaken a study's usefulness.
Recall from the start of the lesson,
that the ability to say that changes in one variable cause changes in a second,
comes from controlling for the effects of our other variables.
Ideally, we would like the distribution of all of our variables to remain the same
across our groups except for the one that we manipulated to be different.
Failure to pay attention to this means that we could fall into some analysis traps.
For example, let's say that you have
some observational data that shows that in months where there are higher ice cream sales,
there are also higher volume of crimes committed.
Does this mean that ice cream consumption is causing people to commit more crimes,
and that we should stop ice cream from being sold?
If we look at the data more carefully,
we can find a variable that is modulating both of them; the average temperature.
In the summer months, the higher heat causes there to be more ice cream sales.
At the same time the heat causes higher unrest and more crimes to be committed.
The temperature is an example of a confounding variable.
A confounding variable is one that is not part of the variables of interest,
but nonetheless has an interaction with those variables that we do care about.
Accounting for or controlling for these potential confounds are
vital for establishing a relationship between our variables of interest.